SHUKRAT KHUDONAZARBEKOVICH KARAMKHUDOEV




















        THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL 
                IDEAS OF NASIR KHUSRAW AND JALALEDDIN RUMI


























                THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION OF REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN
                         THE TAJIK NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF LANGUAGES




        




                 SHUKRAT KHUDONAZARBEKOVICH KARAMKHUDOEV














        THE COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL 
                IDEAS OF NASIR KHUSRAW AND JALALEDDIN RUMI








        Executive editor Doctor of Philosophy, Professor Kh. M. Ziyoev






                
                                    Dushanbe-2011                
BBK-87 (2 Taj.)
K-21
Shukrat K. Karamkhudoev The Comparative Analysis of Religious and Philosophical Ideas of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi. Dushanbe, 2011.








Executive editor: Doctor of Philosophy, Professor Kh. M. Ziyoev


Reviewers: Corresponding member of Academy of Sciences of Republic of Tajikistan, Doctor of Philosophy, Professor Kh. Dodikhudoev


Candidate of Philosophy, Associate Professor M. Mahmadova






This monograph, for the first time ever, by way of comparative analysis considers the teachings of the great thinkers of the East-Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi. In the author’s opinion, these great thinkers hold the same position in the interpretation of many religious and philosophical problems. 
The results and conclusions of this research can be used for the study of emergence and development of Ismaili and Sufi religious ideas, the religious and philosophical ideas of Tajik-Persian thinkers, and for the examination of problems in the study of human nature.










                                        CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION                                                                        3
CHAPTER 1: Ismailism and Sufism as Two Independent 
         Religious-Philosophical Branches of Islam and Their Mutual 
         Influences on Each Other
1. The Historical Roots of Interconnection of Ismailism and Sufism           17
2. The Common Characteristics of the Teachings of Nasir Khusraw 
     and Jalaleddin Rumi and the Origins of Their Theories                        49
CHAPTER 2: The Main Ideas of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi Regarding 
                 the Problems of Ontology, Cognition, and the Study of Human 
                 Nature
        1. Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi’s View on the Problem of Eternity
            and the Creation of the World                                                83
        2. Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi on Space and Time                        104
        3. The Role of Reason in the Teachings of Nasir Khusraw and 
     Jalaleddin Rumi                                                                114
4. The Teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi about the 
     Perfect Human Being                                                        140
CONCLUSION                                                                                174
Index                                                                                        180














                                        INTRODUCTION
The modern epoch which is characterized by the activization of dialogue among various civilizations, requires every research on the history of philosophy to have scientifically valid search for points of interconnection and methods of unification of different ideas and worldviews. However, it is not only between various civilizations but within the same cultural stratum that it is possible, by way of comparison of certain religious-philosophical movements and teachings of their representatives, to find ways which unite rather than separate those certain teachings. In this respect, there are more similarities than there are differences between the teachings of the prominent representatives of the Islamic civilization. The comparative research of such teachings, can serve as an instrument of dialogue between the various branches of Islam by unifying the positive ideas of their respective representatives. For this reason, researches that are conducted in the social-philosophical thought to achieve this dialogue are not only the requirements of time and the logical development of modern society but can also serve as a foundation for the future.
In the Republic of Tajikistan, where certain contrarieties had appeared between its various regions during the civil war and where to this day the official government is popularizing the idea of national unity after achieving a reconciliation, relying on the peace promoting views of thinkers such as Nasir Khusraw (1004-1088) and Jalaleddin Rumi (1207-1273) can serve as the speediest way of achieving that unity. For centuries these thinkers have been held in high regard in the eyes of their direct successors who follow a system of views of various branches of Islam. Not only does the comparative research of teachings of these highly accomplished representatives of Tajik philosophy reveal the commonality of their certain ideas but it also helps to educe the points of interconnection between Ismailism and Sufism.
The importance of the present work is dictated first and foremost by the necessity to investigate the following theories: first, there is an opinion given in the history sources about the identity of Shams Tabrezi, the spiritual mentor of Rumi, according to which Shams Tabrezi belonged to the family of the Ismaili imams of Alamut;1 second, the folk version of pamiri Ismailis suggests that Rumi was a follower of their faith.2 His writings are widely popular among the modern Ismailis of Pamir and many can even recite his famous “Masnavi”. Third, there are statements in “Masnavi” in which Rumi contends his propensity towards Ismaili and Shia ideas (3; 4103-4104).
The significance of the researched topic is reaffirmed by the following arguments:
        1. The religious-philosophical teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi do not lack any theoretical and practical values for muslims worldwide and to a certain degree help every human being to contemplate his/her essence and purpose. However, this task requires the overcoming of unilateralism which has been supposed in the philosophical history. In an attempt to assess philosophical heritage in relation to a human and to the world, the value of materialism has been accentuated while the spiritual has been denied as well as the correlation of the two. The teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi represent a heritage that maintains the balance between the spiritual and the material. 
        2. The particularity of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi’s religious-philosophical system of views is that the majority of their ideas on morals have aspects that apply to humanity at large and the use of these ideas in the modern world can have an impact that is beneficial to the societal morality.
REFERENCES HERE PAGE 4
        3. A scientific comparative research of religious-philosophical views and humanistic ideas of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi aside from everything else, will have a great value for the development and strengthening of self-consciousness for modern tajiks.
        4. The comparison of religious-philosophical concepts of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi allows one to get acquainted with the rich philosophical heritage of medieval muslim scientists, which has had significant impact on the successive philosophy of their European colleagues. This heritage is a model for today’s generation and has to become a foundation for the revival of the great Islamic culture. It has to serve as a key to solve not only philosophical but also many social and political problems.
In the past century, the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi had become the topic of scientific research for philosophers and literary critics here in our country and abroad. As a result a great number of articles and monographs about the lives, practices, literature heritage and religious-philosophical ideas of Nasir Khusraw3 and Jalaleddin Rumi4 have been published.
REFERENCES HERE PAGE 5
Worth to mention is the fact that there are many articles and monographs that have been published about Ismailism5 and Sufism6 which shed light of the core teachings of these schools of thought. It is not possible to include every such research into one monograph, therefore we shall focus on the works which have been dedicated to the problems in teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi since they interest us the most. 
The inquiry into the life and art of Nasir Khusraw has been undertaken by scientists in a serious manner only at the end of the nineteenth century. One of the very first works dedicated to the teachings of Nasir Khusraw called “Nasir Khusraw and Ismailism”7 belongs to the Russian orientalist, Ivanov V. A. The author rates the thinker’s teachings negatively, considers the style of his compositions boring and his philosophy to be the repetition of the Greek philosophy. However, Bertels A. E. in his work which bears the same name, “Nasir Khusraw and Ismailism”8, denies Ivanov’s opinion, ranking the teaching of Nasir Khusraw highly and considering his role in the development of Ismaili ideas to be invaluable. The work of Bertels has been highly ranked by the majority of expert orientalists.
In Tajikistan, the research on the teachings of Nasir Khusraw had begun in the middle of the twentieth century.
REFERENCES HERE PAGE 6  
The first researcher of his philosophy is Ashurov G. In his work called “The Philosophical Views of Nasir Khusraw”9 written based on the philosopher’s “Zad-ul-Musafirin”, the author touches on the subjects of existence and epistemology. For the analysis of the thinker’s other work, “Jame-ul-Hikmatayn”, a dissertation by Murodova T. has been dedicated, in which she discusses the following subjects: the relationship between God and the nature, the unity of substance and accident, the essence of motion and time, the correlation between body and soul, emotion and reason, etc.
Another dissertation work written by Shohkhumorova A., focuses on Nasir Khusraw’s theory of cognition.11 The author analyzes the role of sense organs in the cognition process of the world and the relationship between cognition and negative theology from the thinker’s point of view. A research done by Arabzoda N. called “The World of Ideas and Contemplations of Nasir Khusraw”12 includes the following aspects of the thinker’s philosophy: theology, ontology, specifically the subjects of substance and accident, motion, time, space, human essence, the soul and epistemology, i.e. the cognition process of the world, the role of sense organs in this process, and also the thinker’s ethical outlook.
Among the works dedicated to the study and analysis of Ismaili ideas, the work of Dodikhudoev Kh. stands out with its comprehensive coverage of issues, scientific argumentation and presentation of concrete facts. Dodikhudoev Kh. in his fundamental work called “The Philosophy of Peasant Rebellion”13 quite comprehensively touches on the questions of existence and cognition in Nasir Khusraw’s philosophy.
Page 7 references here 
The modern foreign researchers of Nasir Khusraw’s teachings include the names of Mahdi Muhakkik14, Fakirmuhammad Hunzai15, A. Hansberger16 and others.
The subject of the creation of the world in the teachings of Nasir Khusraw is the center of attention of almost all of the aforementioned researchers. Having analyzed this subject, Arabzoda N. comes to the conclusion that the world, from Nasir Khusraw’s point of view, is a created one.17 In respect to space and time, in Arabzoda’s opinion, Nasir Khusraw adheres to concept of relativity. Having compared the conclusions of Nasir Khusraw on this issue with the philosophies of M. Razi and Ibn Sina, Arabzoda concludes that contrary to Razi and Sina who considered time and space to be original, Nasir Khusraw considered them created.
In T. Murodova’s opinion, Nasir Khusraw in the process of “contemplation of many questions related to the material world, diverges from Ismaili mysticism to materialism.”18
Intellect in the teachings of Nasir Khusraw takes high priority and is one of the main notions of his philosophy. Because of this, a Pakistani researcher, Azizulla Najib thinks that Nasir Khusraw’s worldview id based on reason. To support his claim, the researcher refers to the fact that in discussing all issues the philosopher relies on reason.19
Page 8 references here
Hansberger A. sees the role of reason in a human’s life as a base of Nasir Khusraw’s teachings, in that reason is like a weapon with which a human fights off ignorance and nescience and comprehends the Truth and salvation.20
Talking about the role of a human in Nasir Khusraw’s teachings, Arabzoda N. notes that the thinker investigates a human being “from the position of anthropocentrism of Ismaili theology.”21 In his anthropocentric teaching the hierarchy of existence culminates with the creation of a human and the purpose of creation is specifically a human. In Arabzoda’s opinion, the teachings of Nasir Khusraw are not limited by that alone, his anthropocentrism takes a humanistic character.22
The teachings of Jalaleddin Rumi are also the center of attention of many researchers here in our country and also abroad. In western orientalism, Rumi’s teachings have attracted the attention of researchers such as A. Nicholson, A. Scimmel, Briegel and others. In Turkey, research on Rumi’s teachings was done by A. Golpinorli, Sh. Uzluk, A. Kabakli, and others, in Iran – Said Nafisi, Zabehullah Safo, Rizozoda Shafak, Ali Dashti, Abulhusain Zarinkub, Badeuzzaman Furuzanfar, Mujtaba Bashardust, and others. In Russia such research was conducted by V.V. Bartold, O.F, Akimushkin, A. Krimsky, M.F. Okhundov, M.T. Stepanyants, and others.
In Tajikistan, teachings of Rumi were the topic of special researches by N. Odilov, Kh. Khodizoda, Kh. M. Ziyoev, M.T. Muhammadjonova, and others. A work by N. F. Odilov called “The Worldview of Jalaleddin Rumi” in Tajik and Russian languages can be considered as one of the first successful works dedicated to defining some of the religious-philosophical aspects of the thinker’s worldview. 
Page 9 references here
Ziyoev Kh. M. in his work “The Sufi Order of Mavlavia”23 investigates the various aspects of the order as a whole and the teachings of Rumi in particular. Mainly, he touches on the issues of existence, cognition of the world and God, tolerance and social-ethical ideas of the thinker. In Ziyoev’s opinion, self-discovery and the discovery of God according to Rumi are synonymous and the essence of theocentrism and anthropocentrism in his teachings are fused. In teachings of Rumi, God has more of an epistemological rather than ontological meaning. God is inaccessible for intellect as He is above it and He possesses no qualities. This world is created and therefore in due time will disappear, however a spiritual world exists along with it which is eternal. The material world exists only to cognize the spiritual world. From Ziyoev’s perspective, the display of human evolution for Rumi also has more of an epistemological meaning rather than ontological. Discussing the role of sense organs in Rumi’s teachings, the researcher notes that sense organs are required to understand the and to preserve the human body, and they, being exterior tools, complete one another. However, along with exterior sense organs, Rumi acknowledges the existence of five inner senses. In the process of understanding the world crucial is the role of reason which takes its beginning from emotions. Talking about the social-ethical aspect of Rumi’s teachings, Ziyoev notes that from the thinker’s point of view society is a requisite for unified people. It must have one leader and justice must prevail in it.
M.T. Muhammadjonova had mainly investigated the ethical views of Rumi.24
Page 10 references here     
Analyzing the subject of a human being from a social-ethical perspective, she notes that a human’s duty is first and foremost to realize his/her self-source (asl), and he/she must strive for it just as a metal cannot not be attracted to a magnet. Human soul returns to its source after death, where human body turns into dust and causes the emergence of new material objects. In M.T. Muhammadjonova’s opinion, Rumi stands against Ibn Arabi who considered self-realization to be exclusive to chosen ones and not everybody else. Aside from that, Muhammadjonova thinks that from the thinker’s perspective, the five Sharia commandments are only a transitive phase of an ever-improving human being and are only a shell of religiousness.25 The perfect human is an incarnation of God and distinguishes between good and bad by his actions. One of the important aspects of Rumi’s teachings, according to Muhammadjonova is justice which is a Godly attribute and which brings one closer to God. Justice in the teachings of Rumi, in the researcher’s opinion, has two sides. First-social: in this context it is used with respect to heads of states, shahs, politicians, etc. and in this case Rumi acts as a protector of human rights. By the second meaning of the word, justice is a Sufi term.
Another significant research on teachings of Rumi is a work by Khalifa Abdulhakim.26 In his work, this scholar touches on many religious-philosophical aspects of Rumi’s teachings: time, space, motion, substance, accident, eternity (baqo), disappearance (fano), free will, exoteric and esoteric meanings of the Quran and Sharia. In Abdulhakim’s opinion, the main reason of creation in Rumi’s teachings in necessity.27 Space and time are only characteristics of the material world and are not relevant to the spiritual world.
Page 11 references here     
The researcher also promotes an idea that Rumi does not support the theory of existential unity (vahdati vujud). 
Thus, the current conducted analysis shows that the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi have been separately studied by scholars both domestic and foreign. However, studies dedicated to the comparative analysis of teachings of the two philosophers are almost non-existent. It has been only in the recent years that some articles containing such analysis have appeared. Researchers M. Gulomrizo and Ahmad Yahya Ilahi note the interrelationship of teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi in their review article.28 Articles by A. Muhammadkhojaeva, L. Tanaeva-Salomatshoeva and M.T. Muhammadjonova29 also talk about the interconnection between Ismaili and Sufi teachings, particularly the role of allegorical interpretations of these two branches of Islam. Muhammadjonova, in her article, notes the exoteric and esoteric meanings of Sharia and the place of allegorical interpretation of the Quran in the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Rumi. Having compared the teachings of both thinkers, Kh. M. Ziyoev comes to the conclusion that there are many commonalities between their separate teachings as well as between Ismailism and Sufism.
Page 12 references here
The current work is dedicated to the comparative analysis of key ideas in the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi regarding the subjects of ontology, cognition and the study of human nature which have not been a subject of separate studies. The main goal of the current work is the reconstruction of key aspects of religious-philosophical views of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi, and on the basis of their comparison – affirmation of the unity of religious-philosopical process in Ismailism and Sufism in the medieval times. To achieve this goal the following issues were addressed:
* Determine the character of interrelationship of Sufi and Ismaili ideas in the middle ages, identify the cause of the dominant teachings of Sufism in that time period;
* Show the similarities and differences between Sufism and Ismailism regarding the major religious-philosophical issues;
* Reveal the history and evolution of the primary Ismaili ideas, particularly some aspects of its teachings on faith concealment (taqiyya), periods of revelation and hiding (kashf and satr); 
* Identify the views of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi on the subjects of creation of the world, space and time in comparison to the teachings of their predecessors and modern science;
* Determine the essence of intellect in the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Rumi and their stance on the role of reason as a tool for cognition;
* Analyze the ideas of the aforementioned thinkers on the place of a human being in creation, his evolution, developmental process and achievement of perfection, determine the interrelationship of body and soul in this process;
* Determine the role of a spiritual leader in the views and lives of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi;
This work shows the similarities between the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi on the following issues:
* In the teachings of Nasir Khusraw and the religious-philosophical concepts of Rumi, there are commonalities of views on the issue of creation expressed in that based on the identical facts, both thinkers deny the opinions of scholars who adhere to the materialistic interpretation of the issue. Both thinkers oppose the materialistic views about the eternal and primordial nature of the world proving its creation by God and the necessity of its disappearance from a religious perspective;
* The similarity between the teachings of the aforementioned thinkers is also confirmed by the fact that both support the relativistic concept of space and time and deny the substantial concept of those categories. Space and time are categories that are peculiar to the material world but the spiritual world does not need them, according to Nasir Khusraw and Rumi. Within the confines of space and time a human being is given an opportunity to develop and achieve perfection; 
* The comparison of views on the role of reason in the concepts of Nasir Khusraw and Jalaleddin Rumi demonstrates the similarity of their stances on this crucial tool of understanding and gives a reason to conclude that Rumi is not a Sufi-irrationalist nor is Nasir Khusraw a rationalist (as it is commonly assumed). Both philosophers, on one hand, consider intellect to be a guide and a tool for human self-cultivation. On the other hand they point to the fact that intellect needs nurture and both adhere to the opinion that intellect shall be used within the confines of religion;  
* The commonality of views of the two philosophers on the role of the perfect human and the criteria for an ordinary human to achieve perfection are a testament to the fact that a human, in their opinion, as a self-knowing and self-creating being, in a lifetime is able of revival and renewal. The world is created and religion is given for its perfection. To achieve perfection a human is required to pass quite a long developmental process. During an evolutionary process a human uses reason and also relying on sense organs understands the world until the eventual achievement of self-perfection. However, intellect in this process shall not avoid the spiritual guide; 
* Both philosophers think that a human consists of a body and a soul but it is only the soul that is the basis of human preservation since a human is created for the soul, where the body only serves to nurture it; a human is on the border between an animal and an angel, however he/she must strive towards his/her angel beginnings in order to achieve a level higher than an angel. 
The sources for the current research include the works of Nasir Khusraw – “Safarnama” (“Book of Journeys”), “Zad-ul-Musafirin” (“Supplies of Travelers”), “Khan-ul-Ikhvan” (“Brothers’ Repast”), “Jame-ul-Hikmatayn” (“Harmony of Two Wisdoms”), “Kushaish va Rahaish” (“Resolution and Release”), “Vajhi Din” (“Face of Faith”), “Ravshanoinoma” (“Book of Light”), and “Divan”, the works of Jalaleddin Rumi – “Masnavii Ma’navi” (“The Spiritual Couplets”), “Devoni Shams”, “Fihi Mo Fihi” (“In it is what is in it”), also works of Abuali Ibn Sina – “Donishname” (“Book of Knowledge”), “Ishorot va Tabehot” (“Guidance and Instructions”), the works of Omar Khayyam – “Rasoili Falsafi” (“Philosophical Treatises”) and others.
  
 


CHAPTER 1
ISMAILISM AND SUFISM AS TWO INDEPENDENT RELIGIOUS-PHILOSOPHICAL BRANCHES OF 
                        ISLAM AND THEIR MUTUAL INFLUENCES
        1. The Historical Roots of Interaction between Ismailism and Sufism
In the middle ages in the Islamic world, society’s social-religious space was occupied by a movement called “sufism”, with the ideas of whom every Islamic school of thought strived to align its religious-philosophical views. By doing that some sects wanted to gain more trust of the Islamic society. Other Islamic sects on the other hand, utilized Sufi teachings to either conceal their real goals or to avoid the censure of their ideological or political opponents. The third group, trying not to fall behind societal progress and be accepted by the masses, synchronized their views with Sufi teachings. For instance, the famous scholar M. Gazali (1058-1111) initially opposed Sufism and along with philosophers and ta’limis accused it of weakening of the Islamic faith.31 However, he subsequently changed his attitude towards Sufism and not only did not consider Sufis to have corrupted Islam but also declared the Sufi way of understanding God to be the best method and the Sufi way of life-exemplary.32 All of this demonstrates the level of influence of Sufi teachings on the development of societal thought and its domination of public consciousness in the medieval times.
31 Kh. Dodikhudoev. The Philosophy of Peasant Rebellion. - Dushanbe, 1987- pg. 18
32 Kh. Dodikhudoev. The Philosophy of Peasant Rebellion. - Dushanbe, 1987- pg. 18
Another reason for the development of Sufi ideas, especially in Iran, lies in the free-thinking spirit of its people which was a remnant of the pre-Islamic period. As is known, Islam initially announced the equality of all races and peoples, however later on the Omeyyades and the Abbasids started to consider themselves the superior race. For this reason, the Arab invaders also counted themselves as a superior race and considered the invaded nations slaves. Precisely as a result of such policy, the racial equality in Iran becomes corrupted.33 Sufism on the other hand treated all people equal, independent of their religious or racial affiliations and because of this its teachings suited the free-thinking spirit of the Iranian people better. This had become the primary reason of adoption of Sufi movement by the Iranians.
However, it is important to note that Sufism was not a homogeneous religious-philosophical school. Every branch of Sufism had its own ideas and even its own origins. In Sufism there were no ideas based on which its followers would separate themselves from other people and that would create a barrier between the Sufi teachings and the teachings of other religious schools of thought. Sufi followers always made compromises with other religions in order to live in peace and harmony with them. This liberalism along with the free-thinking spirit of Sufism were the reasons why its followers considered a Zaroastrian, a Christian, a Jew, a Muslim, and even an idol-worshipper to be equal. Being equal, they had the right to attend a Sufi khanqah and perform all its rites.34 Sufism in the wake of its joining Islam did not create barriers between Islam’s own branches: “In Islam some Sufi schools of thought were Shafeis, some – Hanafis, Hanbalis and even Zahiris and Shiis.”35
In order to determine the reason why various schools of thought and religious sects joined Sufism, it is necessary to identify its purpose and its history of occurrence. 
33 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 52
34 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 50
35 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 52
As is known, there are many different outlooks on these subjects. Even in the interpretation of the word “Sufi”, there are disagreements in the scientific community. Some researchers think that the word “Sufi” originates from the Greek word “Sophia” – wisdom. Others suggest that it takes its roots from the word “Safo” meaning “cleanness.” However, many scholars believe the word originates from the Arab word “suf” meaning “wool”, and that “Sufi” is someone dressed in a wool clothing (pashminapush).
The question whether Islamic Sufism belongs only to the Islamic culture or whether it originates also from other cultures, has not been given a definitive answer also. Some scholars are searching for the origins of Sufism in the Eastern culture, while others maintain an opinion that the genesis of Sufism lies in the Greek culture. The latter is mainly supported by European scholars: “Many outstanding scholars, primarily in Great Britain, underlined the importance of neo-platonic influences on the development of Sufism.”36
In the eyes of an Iranian scholar S. Nafisi, because Europeans are descendants of the Roman, Greek and Alexandrian civilizations, they attempt to find a Greek or a Roman trail everywhere, and search for the source of all teachings in the aforementioned civilizations.37 Nafisi himself considers Eastern civilizations, particularly Chinese, Indian, and Iranian to predate the Greek, Roman, Byzantine, and Alexandrian civilizations.38
36 Schimmel A. The World of Islamic Mysticism. Pg. 17.
37 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 47
38 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 47
He says that even if there are any similarities between the Western philosophy and Islamic Sufism, it is because the Iranian – Arian Sufism was influential on Western philosophy.39 Nafisi makes the following conclusion: Sufism takes its roots from Eastern – Indian, Chinese, and Iranian civilizations. 
Another group of scholars promoted an idea that the origin of Islamic mysticism and Sufism is only the Islamic culture, and the Indian, Buddhist, Manichean, Greek, and the pre-Islamic culture of Iran have no connection to them whatsoever.40
From the history of world civilizations, it is known that a certain culture in isolation with no influence from any other culture cannot develop and reach the limit of perfection. If a culture is disconnected from other cultures, it will never become rich. Islam itself initially could not develop in isolation and only with initiation of contact with the Judaic, Christian, Zaroastrian, Manichean, and other cultures started to progress.41 Other cultures such as the pre-Islamic culture of Iran, Indian, Buddhist, and Greek were also influential on the development of Islamic Sufism.
Mysticism which is representative of every of the aforementioned religions, preserved its initial attributes and origins after connecting with Islam but acquired new meanings within the Islamic culture. After the conversion of various Islamic sects to Sufism, its culture became richer and more diverse. The sources of Sufism increased gradually since every branch of Islam that for whatever reason converted to Sufism without losing its true essence, turned into a source of Sufism itself.
It is important to note, inferring from the preceding paragraph, that Sufism is not a unified religious-philosophical movement and therefore should not be judges unilaterally when examining the teachings of its various schools of thought.
39 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Tehran, 1377, pg. 47
40 Sajjodi S. Mukaddima bar Mabonii Irfon va Tasavvuf. Tehran, 1372, pg. 6
41 Safo Z. Mukaddima bar Tasavvuf. Pg. 16
In 12th – 13th centuries the Sufi teaching was dominant in the Islamic society, thus every branch of Islam, according to the political needs of its time, used that teaching. Although Sufism does not have a unified teaching, in the works of the medieval and modern authors, in most cases, the term “Sufism” is described identically. For instance, in the book “The Explanation of Scientific Terms” (“Kashshof-islohot-al-Funun”), a Sufi is described as such: “A Sufi is someone who dissolves in himself and becomes eternal in God, is someone who is free of his element and is connected to the Truth. Mutasavvif is someone who tries to achieve the level of a Sufi, sufinamo (Sufi imitator) is someone who in name of possessions and status imitates a Sufi or a Mutasavvif, however in reality he is neither a Sufi nor a Mutasavvif.”42 From this description, it can be concluded that, a Sufi is someone who has passed the process of perfection and has attained the level of knowing God, where a Mutasavvif is someone who is still in the process of spiritual development. Sufinamo (Sufi imitator) only imitates the two for worldly goods.
There is a description of a Sufi and a Mutasavvif in the tractate “Kashfiya”, which is similar to the one mentioned above: “…an individual of this sect is called a Sufi, their society – Sufism, and the one who chooses their path is called a Mutasavvif.”43
The aforementioned descriptions show that a Sufi is considered someone has achieved the level of perfection, where a Mutasavvif is someone who desires to reach that level. Sometimes, even the one who would try to portray himself as a Sufi, would also be called a Mutasavvif. In this case the word “Mutasavvif” has been used exclusively with a negative connotation.44
42 Citation from Sajjodi S. Mukaddima bar Mabonii Irfon va Tasavvuf. Pg. 6
43 Citation from Hoshim Ma’rufi Hassani. Tasavvuf va Tashayyu’. Mashhad, 1375, pg. 287
44 Ernest Kara. Sufism. Pg. 51
It is important to note that the word “Sufi” even in the teachings of those who today are considered true Sufis, such as Hafiz and Rumi, was not always used in a positive context. They occasionally considered a Sufi a short-sighted, naïve, and as a judging from external appearance fanatic.45 For instance, Hafiz speaks about a Sufi in the following fashion:
        Sufi nihod domu sari huqqa boz kard,
        Bunyodi makr bar falaki huqqaboz kard.46


        (A Sufi put up a net and opened a stall,
        And wove fallacies in that deceitful world).
Although, the teachings of representatives of Sufism are similar to one another, nonetheless they strongly differ in meaning and content. Many researchers believe that the knowledge of teachings of several representatives of Sufism replaces the knowledge of Sufi teachings as a whole.47 On the other hand, although the representatives of various branches of Islam cleverly make use of Sufi terminology in the interpretation of their ideas, every one of them has their own ideas and worldviews. For instance, contradictions can be noticed when comparing the teachings of Gazali with the teachings of other representatives of Sufism. In his teachings, Gazali called on people to act within the limits of Sharia and to live their lives only based on the Quran and the Hadith. He never separated the meaning of the Quran and Sharia into exoteric and esoteric. However, other Sufis, most notably Rumi, considered Sharia to be only a passing stage of a perfection-seeking human and just a shell of religiousness.48 
45 Sajjodi S. Mukaddima bar mabonii Irfon va Tasavvuf. Pg. 8
46 Sherazi Hafiz. Kulliyot. Tehran, 2001, pg. 80
47 Safo Z. Mukaddima bar Tasavvuf. Pg. 10-11
48 Mahmadjonova M.T. Ethical Views of Jalaleddin Rumi. Dushanbe. 2001, pg. 109  
In the latter’s doctrine Sharia is placed beneath Tariqa and the Quran in his opinion, besides having an exoteric (zahir) meaning also has an esoteric (batin) meaning, within which lies the true essence of the Quran. 
Rumi’s teachings have an individualistic character, i.e. it is directed towards every human being. As for Gazali, his teachings have socialistic character. The latter is concerned with disobeying Sharia laws and retraction of people from rules of the Quran and the Hadith.
The teachings of Rumi show every individual the path to perfection. An individual that passes this path, not only improves his/her own spiritual world but also the society in which he/she lives. This shows once again that Rumi’s teachings cross over from practice to theory. Gazali, on the other hand, creates a theory and then tries to use it in practice. Because his theory defends public interest, he begins to search for reasons of weakening of people’s faith in society: “Therefore I started to pursue the reasons for people’s indifference and the weakening of their faith and found that there are four:
The reason stemming from those who have submersed themselves into philosophical science;
The reason stemming from those who have submersed themselves into a Sufi life;
The reason stemming from those who have connected themselves with the teachings of Talimi’s;
The reason stemming from that people are dealing with those who are coined as scholars.”49 Gazali’s goal was to renew orthodox Islam, to cleanse it from alien ideas, to call on people to live their lives according to the rules of the Quran and the Hadith and to strictly follow the Sharia law. Therefore, he was forced to look for schools and movements that contradicted his own ideas.
49 Stepanyants M.T. Eastern Philosophy. M. 1997, pg. 426 
However, in the teachings of Sufis such as Sanai, Attar, and Rumi, the pluralism of ideas is never violated. They give the same treatment not only to Islamic branches but to other religions as well.
Thus, even if the style of teachings of various representatives of Sufism is similar externally, in many cases they contradict one another content-wise. These contradictions reached such a high level that they would become the reason for confrontations between various Sufi movements, for example between the “Haydariya” sect, the followers of Sultan Haydar and sheikh Safauddin Ardabil, and the “Nemati” sect, the followers of Shah Ne’matullah Vali.50
When comparing the views of modern scholars on teachings of Sufism, its history of occurrence and its origins, a certain contradiction can be noticed. Some scholars consider Sufism as a unified movement and assess the teachings of its separate representatives unilaterally, where other scholars deny this viewpoint and propose that Sufism is divided into different schools of thought, and even every one of the outstanding representatives of Sufism has his own schools and direction. Some scholars look for the roots of Islamic Sufism in Greek and Roman cultures. Others, on the other hand, propose an idea that the origins of Islamic Sufism are to be found in the pre-Islamic culture of Iran, and also in Indian and Chinese cultures. One group of scholars believes that Sufism is characteristic of Islam only, where another group thinks that Sufism has been imposed on Islam. Some scholars think that Sufism had originated within Shiism, where others believe it is within Sunni Islam that Sufism has originated. There is also an opinion that Sufism is divided between a real one and a fraud. All of this points out to the fact that there is no common opinion among scholars on Sufism, its teachings and origins. Scholars take different stances on this issue and every one considers their opinion to be the better.
50 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Pg. 50 
Annimari Schimmel states the essence of reasoning of modern scholars on Sufism in the following fashion: “In recent years many books about Sufism and spiritual life in Islam have been published. Every one of them touches on the various aspects of a phenomenon, most commonly known as Sufism, for it is so immense and diverse that hardly anyone will be able to give its full description. And so the blind from the famous Rumi parable, having touched an elephant, describe him depending on what body part the hands of each have touched. For one, an elephant seems like a throne, for others – a fan, a water pipe or a column: but no one could imagine how the elephant would look as a whole.”51
In S. Nafisi’s opinion, initially Sufism in Iran had only the attributes of Tariqa and had no connection whatsoever with Sharia,52 which in his opinion, is evidenced by the Sufi books of those times and which have made it to our times. Iranian Sufism did not connect Tariqa with Sharia till the middle of the 11th century.53 Sufi books written before the first half of the 11th century contain only Tariqa terminology. For example, in the works of Abubakr Muhammad bin Ishak Bukhari (died 833) “Portrayal of Sufi sects” (“At-ta’rif al Mazohib ahl altasavvuf”) and Abulhasan Ali bin Usman Hajavir Gaznavi (died 971) “Revelation of Secrets” (“Kashf-ul-Mahjub”) terminology such as repentance (tavba), asceticism (zuhd), poverty (faqr), patience (sabr), humility (tavozu’), fear (khawf), piety (taqvo), sincerity (ikhlos), gratitude (shukr), hope (tavakkal), gratification (rizo, qanoat), conviction (yaqin), remembrance (zikr), annhiliation (fano), eternity (baqo), love (muhabbat), etc. is used.54 
51 Schimmel A. The World of Islamic Mysticism. Pg. 13
52 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Pg. 105
53 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Pg. 105
54 Nafisi S. The Source of Mysticism in Iran. Pg. 106 
Therefore, it can be noted that the influence of Sharia on the teachings of Iranian Sufism till the second half of the 11th century is virtually nonexistent. In our opinion, the main reason for that lies in the Iranian free-thinking spirit of the pre-Islamic period which was still dominant in the minds of followers of Sufi schools, therefore they did not want to live in the captivity of Sharia. Gazali was the first to reconcile Tariqa with Sharia and connected them. In his books he connected the Sharia and Tariqa terminologies: knowing the soul (shinokhti nafs), knowing God (shinokhti Khudo), knowing the world (ma’rifati dunyo), knowing the other world (ma’rifati okhirat), the belief of followers of Sunnism (e’tiqodi ahli sunnat), purification (tahorat), prayer (namoz), charity (zakot), fasting (ruza), pilgrimage (hajj), etc.
Followers of Sufism, even after Gazali, did not consider Tariqa connected to Sharia and thought that Sharia consisted of exoteric and esoteric contents and like the essence of Tariqa – the former in their teaching stays a level lower that the latter. Only Tariqa was able to bring them to Haqiqat (truth). Thus, they considered themselves the people of truth (ahli haqiqat), where the Muslims the teachings of whom relied on Sharia, they called the people of Sharia or Zahiris: “Islamic lawmakers (faqehon) and theologians criticized Sufis for that they had separated Sharia and Haqiqat. Sufis considered themselves the people of truth and the experts of Sharia they called people of Sharia or Zahiris. Indeed, because of this, Sufis like Batinis (Islamailis – K.Sh.) and Gulats,55 relied on interpretation (ta’vil).”56
55 A term containing an element of disapproval of people accused of radical relationship towards a religion.
56 Zarrinkub A. From Inheritance of Sufism. Tehran, 1369, pg. 162
The appearance of Sharia for Sufis was like a human body, while its interior – a soul. The former – obvious, the latter – hidden (Rumi 3.4250-51). M.T. Muhammadjonova, examining the relationship of Sufism with Sharia, rightfully notes: “Islamic ideal entails the observance of five commandments of Sharia and does not imply spiritual improvement. Therefore, in relation to the official Islam, Sufis use a notion of zahir exoteric, since in Mavlana’s opinion, the five commandments of Sharia are only a passing stage of an ever-improving human being and are only a shell of religiousness. ”57
The teaching of real Sufis was constantly supplemented with new terminologies during the long time of its development, their method of appeal was gaining a new character. For instance, Fariduddin Attar defined seven stages for the process of self-improvement of a human being which he called the seven valleys: search (talab), love (ishq), cognition (ma’rifat), absence of need (istigno), monotheism (tavhid), astonishment (hayrat), poverty (faqr), disappearance (fano). These terminologies have been used in the teachings of other Sufis before Attar as well as after. However, such interpretation of these terminologies and their role in the process of perfection of a human being, are to be found only in Attar’s work. Thus, Sufism with is various schools of thought such as Mavlaviya, Naqshbandiya, Bektoshiya, Kadiriya, Yasaviya, Rifaya, Sukhravardiya, Chishtiya, Shaziliya, Badaviya, Desukiya, Khalvetiya, Bayramiya, Nematulohiya, Damrodoshiya, Haydariya, Qalandariya,58 etc. has contributed greatly to the Islamic culture. The popularity of this movement depended on its prominent representatives, which included Sanai, Attar, Rumi, Saadi, Hafiz, and other bright stars of Tajik-Persian culture.
57 Muhammadjonova M. Ethical Views of Jalaleddin Rumi. Dushanbe, 2001, pg. 109
58 Hasan Kamil Yilmaz. Organization of Tasavvuf // Tasavvuf and Tariqas. M, 2007. Pg. 207-231 
There were also processes in Sufism that cannot be characterized as positive. For instance, Sufis in order to pass the divine path, did not rely on religion or any other form of worship. Sufi followers even considered religion to be an obstacle on the path to God. One of the representatives of Sufism in the 11th and the start of the 12th centuries – Ainulkuzot said the following on the issue: 
                Otash bizanam bisuzam in mazhabu kesh,
                Ishqat biniham ba joi mazhab dar pesh.
                To kai doram ishq nihon dar dili khesh,
                Maqsudi rahe tui’, na din astu na kesh.59     


                (I will light a fire and burn these religions and customs,
 I will choose your love over religion.
 Until what time will I secretly hold your love in my heart,
 You are the goal, not religion and customs).
Religion and belief, according to representatives of Sufism, are only tools with which a human being reaches the Truth (God). However, a Sufi who is sure of his spiritual strength is independent of religion and any other forms of belief, and considers them an obstacle to the divine path. The belief in the inherent strength of a human being was so captivating for the followers of Sufism that not only religion but even knowledge and intellect were considered barriers for journeymen searching for God. These Sufis considered their knowledge inherent and forbade their followers from practicing science: “Sheikhs of this group would always hold their murids and followers under their influence for a lifetime, compelled them to forbearance and deliberation in conversations which they had with them, would discuss many topics…But they had no books, did not allow their followers to use books and would tell them: 
Bishuy avroq agar hamdarsi moi,
Ki ilmi ishq dar daftar naboshad.
(Erase the notebook if you are our brother in learning,
For the science of love is not written in a notebook)”60    
Such behavior of Sufis were quite dangerous for the public because a negative opinion and even a hatred towards sciences was forming in the mind of the society. The masses were turning to Sufism but it was denying them science. Sufi sheikhs not only forbade their murids to do science but even started to destroy books. For instance, Abdulkadir Gelani washed off texts of philosophical books which he considered harmful for his students.61 Hatred for books and science in Sufism gradually turned into a tradition. One who dealt with books was not considered a Sufi: “Breaking inkwells and tearing up books were considered the first steps in Sufism among some mystics.”63     
What was the cause for some Sufi sheikhs to call upon their followers to hate books? In our opinion, one of the main reasons was that the preeminent representatives of Sufism divided the people into chosen ones and the masses (“khos” and “khom”) and started to communicate with the masses using external content of words and with the chosen ones using the internal content. Therefore, the esoteric meaning and content of their own teachings were becoming incomprehensible for the masses.
60 Safo Z. Mukaddima bar Tasavvuf. – Guharnashr, 1371. Pg. 21
61 Schimmel A. The World of Islamic Mysticism. – M., 2000. Pg. 23
62 Schimmel A. The World of Islamic Mysticism. – M., 2000. Pg. 23
63 Schimmel A. The World of Islamic Mysticism. – M., 2000. Pg. 23


For the preeminent representatives of Sufism the importance of comprehending the secrets of their teachings by ordinary people was of no concern. They thought that people must be content with the exoteric meaning of their symbols and parables. The reason for such an approach lied, first of all, in the fact that Sufis hid the essence of their teachings and ideas from their ideological enemies. However, the choice for such a method by the representatives of Sufism, on one hand prevented the full comprehension of their teachings, and on the other hand harmed the society because the masses were not able to penetrate into the essence of their ideas and were content with the exoteric meaning: “…one of the Sufi sheikhs in Delhi – Shakhvalialloh wrote that Sufi books may well benefit the chosen ones (khos) but for the masses (omm) they are more dangerous than lethal poison.”64
Another reason why the followers of Sufism renounced science and knowledge was that they considered the prophet an uneducated (ummi) person. Consequently, this turned into one of the fundamental ideas of Sufism.65 However, in Rumi’s opinion: “Mustafa is considered uneducated (ummi) not because he had no knowledge and that he could not write but because his writing, wisdom and knowledge were innate and not acquired.”66
Based on their opinion about the illiteracy of the prophet, the followers of Sufism supposed that anyone can know God without the help of science and knowledge. These kinds of Sufis can be called lying Sufis, ordinary mystics,67 and also imitators. 
64 Schimmel A. 
They imitated only the external content of the teachings of outstanding Sufis and their true meaning was left far away from their consciousness. Through the teachings of such Sufis terms like abjection (faqr) and self-destruction (fano) had appeared which consequently turned into fundamental notions of the Muslim faith. In reality, in the teachings of the preeminent Sufis the said terms have spiritual meanings. For instance, abjection (faqr) in their teachings symbolizes the insignificant amount of the knowledge of the murid compared to the master, as the master is considered wealthy due to his knowledge relative to the murid, and the murid with his insignificant amount of knowledge is poor (faqir). Rumi, having his master in mind, writes in “Masnavi”:
                U gani astu juz u jumla faqir. (3; 3356)
                (He is wealthy and everyone else is poor).
In Ernest Kar’s opinion “…the words dervish and faqir meant the spiritual abjection compared to God, and consequently the dependence on him.”68 However, Sufi – imitators gave the the term abjection a social meaning and encouraged reclusion for the followers of Sufism. In the following couplet, Muhammad Iqbal compares the content of abjection in Rumi’s teachings to its social meaning:
                Zi Rumi gir asrori faqiri,
                Ki on faqr ast mashudi amiri.
                Hazar z-on faqru darveshi k-az vai,
                Rasidi bar maqomi sarbazebi.69


                (Learn the secret of abjection from Rumi,
His abjection is envious for an amir.
Beware of the abjection from which,
You lowered yourself to depression).
